Doctor...
they are writing all these articles about
cocaine hubs and drug smuggling in this area.
Do you believe it?
It's not that I don't believe it.
I have been getting hints
every now and then.
Some of them have come to
me for prescription drugs.
Those who are cocaine addicts can't
hide their addiction from a doctor.
Ok, so they are doing drugs.
But why the murders?
They are very closely related.
For example...
Suppose, I am a cocaine dealer...
And you have found out
about my business...
In such a situation, will it be wise for me
to keep you alive?
You might go tell the police, right?
And land me at jail?
Even then, do you think I'll
keep you alive?
Looks like you have really understood the
the thought process of criminals very minutely.
See, Mr. Ajit, It's a good deed
to give a home to a homeless...
But, I have warned you that
tears of strangers are only water...
No no. I do not believe that Mr. Atul
has done this.
It'll be decided after
the court's verdict...
But...
See, Doctor...
He is a young man, looking for a job.
He has no place to take shelter.
My room is pretty big...
That's why I had agreed to
stay with him.
But the man is never at home, isn't it?
Do you know what kind of job he had?
What would he do! The problems
of being unemployed.
He used to wake up and leave to
hunt for a job.
The entire day he used to go here and
there... Asking around in offices.
You do know what the situation with
jobs are like here.
At night, maybe he used to go looking
for a job as a night guard.
These are very dark times.
Atul Babu, you're here?
Weren't you arrested?
A cop is deadlier than a tiger...
What happened Ghanashyam!
Oh, Ghanashyam! Wait!
Atul Babu, you are back?
The police let you go?
Yes, Doctor.
There's a proverb in English, isn't it?
"Bad Penny"
Even I came back as rejected.
Even the police did not take me.
No, it's actually good
that you've come back.
That is very good.
But for me... you know...
No no. Absolutely, I understand.
I hope you understand.
It's true.
You might get involved in aiding and abetting
case, if you give shelter to a criminal like me.
So, do I need to vacate by tonight?
No no. You can stay tonight.
But, tomorrow morning
you will have to...
All right. Thank you, Doctor.
Ajit!
Call Mr. Anukul!
This is the problem with
these locks, understand?
It just cannot be fixed
once there is a problem.
Here take it. I'll call the carpenter
tomorrow and get it fixed, ok?
All right, Doctor.
Come in.
Doctor...
I have come to test the
benefits of your medicines.
I have a splitting headache.
Can you give me anything?
Yes, sure.
You have a headache because of you
haven't eaten anything, understood?
Here, have this. You will be
fine by tomorrow morning.
All right.
Mr. Ajit... You don't look too
well either.
You look weak after all the excitement.
Your body is giving up, is it?
Wait.
You...
take this.
You take this. You will feel
a lot better tomorrow morning.
All right, Doctor.
We'll take leave.
Namoshkar!
Doctor, have you heard of anyone named
Byomkesh Bakshi?
No. Who is he?
Even I do not know.
I heard his name at the police station.
He's the one who is
investigating this murder.
Doctor...
Bye. Good night.
Hey! What is the matter!
Stay a little longer in this darkness...
light will illuminate from here itself.
But... light?
You mean...
Light will come from the
source of darkness?
That itself is your light!
That's good.
For now, let there be darkness.
It's a very sad story, Doctor...
A professional like you, stabbing a pillow?
Don't move! Don't you dare move!
Ajit! Ajit!
Take the knife from his hand.
What?
What is my crime?
There's more than one, Doctor.
Cocaine business..
Murder...
Do you have any proof that
I have a cocaine business?
Yes, sure I do.
Your medicine boxes from abroad...
Am I wrong?
Tell me something, Doctor.
What medicine did you
give us tonight?
Morphine. Isn't that right?
The charge sheet for your crimes is being
prepared at the police station.
But for now...
I arrest you for attempting to murder
Byomkesh Bakshi.
Inspector, do you have
a matchbox?
No matter how dried garlic may get...
It never loses its flavor.
Remember Mr. Detective.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Ajit.
Satyanweshi?????
You know.. I don't like the sound
of the term "Detective"...
and "investigator" is even worse.
That's why I've given myself the name...
"Truth Seeker"
Come in... come in.
Welcome! Welcome to the house
of the poor.
Hey Putiram!
Get a cup of hot tea and
some kachoris (Flatbread).
Your house looks very nice!
- So I take it that you live alone.
- Yes, Putiram being my sole companion.
Ajit, didn't you say you were a writer?
Is that your professional calling?
How could I resist the urge
to make a profession out of my passion?
The interest on my inheritance
is enough for a bachelor's life like mine.
Hence, I have embraced celibacy
and devoted me to a literary life.
Now that I know where you
live, I will take my leave!
Wait! I just sent Putiram
to bring hot kachoris.
That can wait, it's already
very late now. Goodbye.
Listen Ajit, after what's happened
in that house,
I don't think you will
be able to live there.
Why don't you move in here?
This house isn't so bad after all.
- Are you returning the favor?
- Haha, not exactly a favor.
I have a feeling I will be
needing you more from now on.
Enjoying your company
has become a bad habit!
- I have one condition.
- Tell me.
I want to take all the mysterious
incidents and cases that you solve,
add a little color to them
and publish them as fiction. Agree?
Hmm...
Look, I don't really see any
reason to object to this.
And as you know very well,
the desire for popularity...
is indomitable.
- You don't say!
- But I am.
Hey, where are you rushing off to again?
Let me bring my belongings!
- Okay, don't forget to bring mine!
I won't. I will be back for
lunch in the afternoon!
Okay, see you soon!
Nomoshkaar! (Goodbye)
- Babu, have you thrown away the faulty
pins kept at the back of the shop?
No, why?
I can't find them anywhere.
Good riddance, it was rubbish anyway.
Gramophone pin! Yet again!
Gramophone pin murders continue!
Gramphone pin! Yet again!
The strange murders using
gramophone pins continue!
Breaking and fresh news regarding
the gramophone pin murders!
Read them in the papers! Take! Read
about the gramophone pin killings!
Byomkesh! Again!
Are you listening to me? LISTEN!
Another murder by a gramophone pin.
"Readers may be aware that a few days ago,
Jaihari Sanyal was walking when
he suddenly fell to his own death.
We surmised then that a massive
conspiracy may be lurking behind this.
That suspicion has now been confirmed.
With the incidence of another
ghastly murder yesterday.
Last evening, famous and wealthy
businessman, Kailash Chandra Moulick...
It is clear that it is not a mere accident.
A group of sinister barbaric murderers
has taken over the entire city.
It is difficult to ascertain
their identities or their motive.
What is strange, is there
weapon and modus operandi-
Give me the advertisement page for a bit. - You want
to read the ads when there's a murderer on the loose?
Have you noticed an interesting ad
in the papers for the last few days?
I don't really follow the advertisements.
You don't read the ads in newsppaers?
Then what do you read?
What the newspapers are meant for. News.
Who cut his finger in Manchuria and who delivered
triplets in Brazil, this is what you read?
Listen Ajit, if you want real news,
start reading the ad section.
Oh really? The reporters
these days must be very sly.
Instead of publishing more advertisements,
they are wasting pages on this gibberish.
If they can't satisfy people like you,
they won't be selling their papers anyway.
-Oh really?
-The real news is in the ad pages.
All that is happening in the country,
who's selling what in order to
rob people in broad daylight,
or who is planning to
smuggle stolen goods, -
news like these appears only in
the ad section. Like this one.
"Thorns on the Road"
If you want to rid the road of thorns,
at 5:30 PM on Saturday,
wait at Dharmatala Tram Depot...
by the lamp post next to the tram
line on the southwest end.
This ad has been appearing every
Friday for the last three months.
But..what is the point
of this cryptic message?
There has to be some reason
No one spends so much on
ads without any reason.
However Mr.Writer, one thing
is clear from all this.
What is that?
- His insistence on anonymity.
Whoever he is, he wishes to call
the shots from behind the scene.
I am not sure I follow you.
Let's assume you have a thorn on your path, and
you want to get rid of it. What do you do?
You stand at the specified spot and
wait, holding the lamp post.
You go and wait by the lamp post
like an idiot for half an hour
but nobody appears with the noble aim
of eliminating your thorns for you
You get irritated and give up,
thinking the entire matter is just a ruse
At that precise moment...
And that's how a relationship based on transaction
is established between the two of you
But his identity, and how he looks...
You know nothing of it.
No Byomkesh, your theory
sounds preposterous.
Disbelieving whatever is beyond your comprehension
only reveals your own weakness, Ajit.
Very well, tomorrow is a Saturday.
There isn't much work in the evening
I will prove it to you then.
How exactly?
Putiram!
Old... plump... and stout...
With a walking stick in hand,
expecting to meet us...
Because there's no one living on
the third floor except us.
Come in!
Which amongst you is
Detective Byomkesh Bakshi?
That would be me...
But I am no detective.
I prefer "Truth-Seeker".
Why don't you make yourself comfortable? Then
we can listen to your gramophone pin mystery.
H...how on earth did you know?
Just a guess.
First of all, your age...
Secondly, you look well off,
Thirdly, you are in some trouble which
has brought you to our doorstep.
I-I...
was looking for you because I mean...
I was thinking of you
Now I am convinced I have
come to the right place.
Mr. Byomkesh, you alone can save me!
I expect nothing from the
police, they are useless!
Can you imagine, in broad daylight.
there have been five murders already!
I was almost on the verge
of getting killed me!
Tell me everything from the start
without keeping anything back.
I am Ashutosh Mitra.
I live nearby, at Lebutala.
I have been traveling a lot for
business, ever since I was 18
which left me with very little
opportunity to settle down.
However, I was not really
interested in marriage anyway
I am essentially very self-contained.
I like living by myself...
However, it has been two years
since I retired from work.
All my life earnings,
say around 1.5 lakhs have
been deposited in the bank.
That is all I have, that is what I live on.
Besides this, I-I...
am fond of listening to music
This is how I passed my time,
life was peacefully passing me by
Anyone living with you?
No relatives as such except
for a nuisance of a nephew
who comes by often to ask
for monetary allowances.
Mr. Byomkesh, I cannot tolerate these
the spendthrift and alcoholic gamblers at all!
What does this nephew do?
I don't let that scoundrel in my house!
Where does he live?
He is now in lockup, the police have
arrested him on counts of public drinking
which is why the last two
months were peaceful for me
Then?
- What do you think?
I was doing pretty well while he
was in jail, but Mr. Byomkesh
my entire world turned upside
down without any warning sign.
Thank god for my pocket watch,
I owe it my life!
The fear and worry it put me through all night
may have reduced my lifespan by ten years
I had heard about you,
so I rushed here as soon as I could.
I came by car, I am so shaken
that I couldn't brave walking here.
Mr. Ashutosh, you can relax.
If you follow my instructions, I can assure
you that no harm will come your way.
Mr. Byomkesh, please save
me from this grave danger.
I promise you a reward of 1000 rupees.
(To himself) One thousand?
Great! That comes to 3 grand in total.
Anyway, Mr. Ashutosh?
Tell me something. When you felt
the blow on your chest yesterday,
do you remember hearing a
distinct sound at that moment?
A sound?
- Yes, anything that stands out
For instance, something like
the sound of a tire puncture
Uh... no, I don't think so
- Then perhaps a different sort of sound?
Mr. Byomkesh, I cannot recall a thing - Try,
Mr. Ashutosh, try to remember what you heard
Try and think, some sort of street noise
Uh... general noise of automobiles plying on
road..uh... - Which of these sounds exactly?
That reminds me, Mr.Byomkesh, when
I felt the ache near my chest
I did hear a bicycle bell at that moment
Bicycle bell... Okay,
any other unusual sound?
Uh... no.
Mr. Ashutosh, can you think of any
enemy who might want to kill you?
No no...
You never married right? So you
don't have any children...
Who is the beneficiary of your will?
Your nephew?
Have you made a will yet?
Yes, but my inheritance
doesn't go to my nephew
Not your nephew... Who then?
Nevermind. But, whoever that may be...
does he/she know about this will?
- No.
No one except my lawyer
and I know about it.
Do you see or meet up with
the beneficiary often?
Byomkesh, why did you warn Ashutosh against
leaving the house or frequenting the streets?
Ajit, you must have noticed one thing
regarding the gramophone pin affair.
All the murders took place
in the middle of the road.
Not anywhere else, not
even on the pavement.
Can you think of a reason?
What is it Byomkesh?
- There can be two reasons for this...
First, the streets are always crowded which makes it
easier for the perpetrator to mingle and slip away
Or, the weapon that was used...
cannot be deployed from-
Ajit! Look out!
I forgot where I was
for a moment...
What was saying back there?
- Weapon...
Byomkesh, what kind of
weapon could it be...
The day we discover that, the gramophone pin
mystery would no longer remain a mystery
It cannot be guns or pistols...
The noise they create cannot
be masked by street noise.
Besides, the smell of gunpowder lingers.
Sound is disguised by other sounds.
Where does the smell go?
How come this noise goes unnoticed?
You said it yourself, disguised by other
sounds- - Hey Ajit, listen listen!
Tell me.
No no no...
A sound...
Ajit, for each of the
gramophone pin murders...
there is one strange thing in common.
Have you noticed?
There is?
- Hmm
Like what? - First, all the victims
are past their prime of youth,
Mr. Ashutosh is elderly as well...
Secondly, all of them are pretty well off,
Thirdly, each of them was murdered in
the streets, with lots of eyewitnesses.
Lastly and most importantly,
all of them are childless and heirless.
So you assume-
- I haven't assumed anything yet.
These are what I will base my assumptions
on, also known as "premise".
But you'll need more than these to apprehend
the culprits- - Not culprits, ONE culprit.
The newspapers may have everyone convinced
of a "murderers' gang" but I am certain...
There is only one mastermind behind this.
How can you be so sure of this?
Not everyone will be able to achieve the
target I have set for this murderer
In the Mahabharat as well, only
Arjun could pierce the fish's eye
He is our culprit...
Ittick and George Mann
he is like the omnipresent Brahma
The one and the only
My Queen Victoria! Hehehe!
- Go away!
Hey Mister! Don't you want to come with me?
Moyna isn't the only one who can
enchant you, Bilasini knows it too!
Open your eyes and at
least look at me once!
Youth and beauty can be
located here as well!
Can you sing like Moyna though?
You seem to be besotted with Moyna!
Hahaha, you might as well forget about her.
That broad is Mr. Ashutosh's mistress!
What good fortune too! Her charms seem to
have cast a magic spell on the man!
She probably knows voodoo or something!
Besides the usual payment, he showers
her with jewelry all the time!
That dunce would write off all his
inheritance to her if he could!
Damn! I wish I had a man like that!
Then I wouldn't have to
solicit imbeciles like you
Do you want a paan (betel leaf)?
Since you're offering!
So Byomkesh, the old man seems to be
brimming with passion huh?
So, did you catch a
glimpse of this seductress?
Lucida Grande
How does she look? -Let's not get a celibate like
you unnecessarily excited with that description
Then let's drop it.
So, did you get any clues from the pocket watch?
- Nothing of import but one thing is clear
the distance between the murderer and victim
could not have been more than 7-8 gauges
because a gramophone pin is so light
that is thrown from a greater distance
it wouldn't reach its desired bull's eye
And we have seen how accurate the
murder's aim has been so far
Imagine, what if the murderer goes about with an
unassuming device that shoots gramophone pins
and fires it whenever the
prey is in close proximity
How about that? - This is not one of
your Bot-Tawla (a local trope) stories
In that case, he could have conducted his activity
from the pavement; why step on to the road?
And I don't know of any
such an instrument or device
which when fired can pierce the human body
and punch a hole into his heart
Have you realized how much
of power that requires?
Uh..you are probably right Byomkesh.
Also, it looks like it's going to rain.
The solution keeps evading me, Ajit.
It's slipping out of my grasp
every time I try to decipher it...
Then what next?
So, Byomkesh, why did you become
curious about Mr. Ashutosh's secret life?
Inexplicable curiosity
is my weakness, Ajit.
So what were you curious about?
The beneficiary of Mr. Ashutosh's will.
Her?!
Just a guess.
One cannot forget what happened yesterday.
- What are you referring to?
Thorns of the road? That must
be verified, don't you think?
Pah! Your guess is completely
wrong on this one, I am sure
I would like to test this theory.
I haven't done anything!
There's nothing on me!
Give me your letter.
Banerjee, why are you so scared?
- What is the point of this tomfoolery?
The thorn slipped away
by a whisker, didn't it?
Listen, you better be on your way home.
And one more thing,
Don't go home straight, take a detour
Roam the entire circumference of the city before
heading home, got it. -I see you've smartened up
"Put the letter in an envelope;
next Sunday on 10th March...
at 12 AM, take the road by Khiddirpur
Race Course and walk westward.
You will see a man on a
bicycle come towards you
A man on a bicycle will come towards you...
A man on a bicycle will come towards you
Mr. Byomkesh!
- Mr. Ashutosh, what's the matter?
My lawyer has fled abroad!
Along with your friend from
Jorasanko, am I right?
Y-yes... Y-you know everything about it?
Everything, Mr.Ashutosh.
I know all about it.
I had gone to Jorasanko yesterday and there
I met Binod, with that woman...
They had been conspiring behind your back for a long
time and you never got a whiff of it, not at all...
Shortly after he made you will, Binod paid a
visit Jorasanko to meet your beneficiary
Perhaps out of curiosity at first, but then
what usually follows in such cases
But Binod failed to anticipate
one thing, Mr. Ashutosh
In the drama orchestrated by him,
a small role will be played on stage...
by Byomkesh Bakshi
Come if you want to, or go somewhere el-
Oh, Mr. Lawyer, wait up!
Mr. Binod, I will leave no stone unturned until I solve
the truth behind the attempt on Mr. Ashutosh's life.
Nomoshkaar. (Goodbye)
Who is he?
- Mr. Lawyer!
Oh!
- My landlord is a lecherous man
He keeps following me around
I complained to Mr. Lawyer. That
should show him his right place!
This lawyer comes here often, doesn't he?
- Yes yes-
But why are you snooping
around so much? Hmm?
Mr. Ashutosh, if you think about it, this
has turned out well for you actually
You escaped the conspiracy of a dishonest
woman and corrupt friend, unscathed
There is no immediate danger to your life;
you may walk the streets without any fear
What do you mean?
You know very well what it means,
you simply refuse to believe it
They had conspired to get you murdered,
in order to claim your inheritance
You know, Mr. Byomkesh
I had abstained from all vices...
for 38 years
But then suddenly...
Came my downfall...
I met her at Deogarh...
I was instantly captivated by her beauty,
A whore, after all...
So I could not marry her.
But I couldn't really leave her either...
You know already, Mr. Byomkesh
I had given her my all...
You know, I... saw her as my wife
I thought she considers
me her husband too...
Anyway, I have learned a
a lesson in this old age...
Mr. Ashutosh, you have managed to rise above
the dirt. I will always respect you for that.
But believe me, Mr. Byomkesh
The gramophone pin wasn't shot by them...
Haha! You're right! They didn't.
But they hired someone to do it for them.
Who? - I hope to catch
that person in a few days.
Come in.
May I enter?
Nomoshkaar (Hello)
Hello, I am Prafulla Ray.
I am an insurance agent.
Forgive me, but we don't have any
money for insurance policies.
Hahaha! I haven't come to
pitch you insurance schemes.
I have come to seek some private advice.
You ought to give me some sort of
token for the advice, don't you think?
But of course...
Should I leave it here?
I know you are very busy,
so I will keep it brief.
I work at Jewel Insurance Company...
Business was booming...
But then a young fellow suddenly started to
create problems that were bad for business
He began siphoning all the major
clients over to his side.
I couldn't find a way to
teach him a lesson...
But then my eyes fell on this
advertisement... You may have missed it...
I was ecstatic upon seeing it...
I thought maybe this could help me deal
with the thorn on my road...
I followed the instructions and
reached the specified spot...
Very mysterious, all of it...
It says I have to go meet them,
is it wise to go there alone?
Look, Mr. Prafulla, I am
a little busy today...
Your meeting is tomorrow night. Do one
thing, leave these papers with me.
I will think over it tonight and let you
know what you ought to do by then.
N-no.. I mean...
I have some work tomorrow morning,
is it possible for you to go to tonight?
Tonight, I have to be somewhere
else, Mr. Prafulla...
If you can't make it tomorrow morning,
come in the evening -Very well then.
As you wish.
Do you want a paan?
For you?
You don't want it?
I can't really do without it!
Mr. Byomkesh, should I inform the police?
If you wish to go to the police, you may. Take
the money from the table while you're at it.
No no, since you disapprove of it, I won't.
All right, I will take my leave.
Get up, get ready!
- What is the meaning of all this?
Tonight's the invitation
for the "thorn" obviously!
I can't go anywhere after such a heavy meal.
You can go oblige the invitee by yourself!
No you will come along with me-
We have to offer some advice to
Prafulla tomorrow morning, remember?
Ah, all right, all right!
- Hurry up, don't dilly dally!
Let me see, Ajit. Look at me.
Woah, what is this?
Armour, I will be wearing one too.
Hold still, I will be right back.
- No-o, do we really need to wear this?
Yes, we do. -I am uncomfortable with how your
defense strategy involves a sex change!
Sound is disguised by other sounds.
Isn't it so?
Ajit, you recognize him, don't you?
Our friendly visitor from the morning.
The Meghnad to our gramophone pin mystery!
Mr. Ajit, my cycle has caused you no harm.
I am very fond of this bicycle...
Will you make sure it is somewhere safe?
Where do you think you are going, Ajit?
Do you know what sort
of bicycle that is?
That bell houses all the gramophone pins.
Be patient, why can't you wait
quietly? The police are on their way.
You are very clever, Mr. Byomkesh! - Thank
you but you are no less, Mr. Prafulla.
Not everybody can make such
an ingenious fatal machine.
I am from Midnapore.
My father owned a cycle shop...
That's where I learned how to repair them...
I lost him, my brothers, everything...
to the flood.
I came look for work in the city...
But work...
To avoid dying of starvation....
this strange business idea struck me...
I have removed the thorns
for a great many people...
What else could I have done?
We all need to sustain our own selves.
Don't you agree?
Could I get some..some water?
My throat feels parched...
You will get some at the station.
Then, can you give a
paan from my container?
Just to soothe my throat a bit.
Thank you.
You can take one each as well.
Keep it back!
So you won't let me go then?
You'll hand me over to the police?
Mr. Byomkesh-
Even clever men make mistakes...
You can never hand me over to the police-
- Ajit! Ajit! AJIT!
Ajit! Hold him still! Mr. Prafulla?!
Had you eaten the paan too,
we could have gone away together...
What is going on? Is he dead?
The culprit has escaped justice, Officer.
Byomkesh-
How did you know that the man behind the thorns ad
and the gramophone pin killer was one and the same?
What is the thorns ad really saying?
If you have to obliterate those who
stand in the way of your happiness...
they can avail of his services.
On the other hand, all the victims
of the gramophone pin killer...
they were all thorns on
somebody's road to happiness.
And they were all heirless.
All their wealth would go to
some nephew, or sons-in-law...
The greed for inheritance is pretty evident
from Mr. Ashutosh's case itself.
This is just one side of things.
The other thing deals with
these ads in the newspapers...
where living thorns are eliminated
with a weapon that looks like a thorn.
A guess again?
This was an easy guess.
Let's go...
We can deposit Mr. Ashutosh
cheque reward in the bank.
And return the cycle bell, in exchange
for your bounty from the police. Let's go.
Do you know what I was
thinking instead, Ajit?
If they let me keep the bell instead
of the two thousand rupees...
I mean it's strange and marvelous
piece of craftsmanship...
Yet, what a waste...
Byomkesh-
You have been reading news of
all that's going on around the world...
If a simpleton from the village can
create something this impactful...
if the superpowers of the world combine their
resources and brains to fight each other
can you imagine where the
world is headed towards?
Yes, I can imagine...
Perhaps an invention which can annihilate
an entire city within moments...
Will you applaud its craftsmanship as well?
No, I would say that it's destructive.
But one thing, Ajit....
I hate the criminal mentality
of a skilled man...
but I still respect his mind.
Let's go return the bell and get
the money as decided... Come.